Former FBI deputy director Mark Felt was hailed as a hero and denounced as a villain Wednesday after confessing to being the Watergate scandal's "Deep Throat" -- a disclosure that startled even President George W. Bush. Felt's family and The Washington Post, which spearheaded press coverage of the Watergate cover-up in the early 1970s, confirmed that Felt was the celebrated anonymous source whose leaks helped bring down President Richard Nixon. "I'm the guy they used to call Deep Throat," Felt, now 91, told Vanity Fair in an article published that was the talk of the nation on Wednesday. "All I can tell you is that it was a revelation that caught me by surprise," President Bush told reporters, summing up the feeling of many in the Washington establishment. "For those of us who grew up, got out of college in the late '60s, the Watergate story was a relevant story," Bush said. "And a lot of us have always wondered who Deep Throat might have been. And the mystery was solved yesterday." Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, who was appointed by Nixon as the US ambassador to NATO, in the 1970s, gave a guarded response when asked if he thought Felt had been right to leak confidential information. "Well, I'm not in any judgmental mood," Rumsfeld told a Pentagon briefing. Prepared in strict secrecy by the magazine, the Vanity Fair article flat-footed former Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein who, along with the newspaper's former editor Ben Bradlee, had kept Felt's identity secret for more than 30 years. After initially refusing to confirm Felt as the source, Woodward and Bernstein eventually gave in. "Mark Felt was Deep Throat and helped us immeasurably in our Watergate coverage," the statement said. The two were preparing a major article about their contacts with Deep Throat to be published on Thursday. Deep Throat met with Woodward several times to help break stories about the involvement of Nixon administration officials in the June 17, 1972 burglary of the Democratic National Committee headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington. The scandal ultimately led to Nixon becoming the first US president to resign in August 1974. Felt's grandson, Nick Jones, described his grandfather as "a great American hero" and said his family hoped the country would see him the same way. But not everyone did -- especially former Nixon aides. G. Gordon Liddy, a Nixon operative who served four and a half years in prison for engineering the Watergate break-in, said Felt "violated the ethics of the law enforcement profession," while former Nixon speechwriter Pat Buchanan bluntly labelled him a "traitor." Chuck Colson, the head of White House communications in 1972, said Felt could have helped America avoid a wrenching political crisis. "Mark Felt could have stopped Watergate," said Colson. "He was in a position of that kind of influence. Instead, he goes out and basically undermines the administration." Felt's disclosure received a more positive reception in the press, with several leading US dailies on Wednesday hailing Deep Throat as a prime example of how anonymous sources can keep government abuse in check. Hal Holbrook, the actor who played the Deep Throat character in the 1976 Watergate movie "All The President's Men" said he thought Felt had been driven by a "higher purpose." "The important thing was not who it was, but why he did it," Holbrook said. "It's called morality. That is something that is not very popular today." Jones said his grandfather had initially previously expressed deep reservations about revealing his secret. "But as he recently told my mother, 'I guess people used to think Deep Throat was a criminal. But now they think he's a hero,'" Jones said. Felt's family had no idea about his secret until 2002, when Felt's close friend and frequent social companion, Yvette La Garde, told his daughter Joan that Felt had confided to being Woodward's source. The Vanity Fair article said Joan confronted her father, who initially denied it, but after she explained La Garde's disclosure, he responded: "Since that's the case, well, yes I am." He finally gave in to family pressure to go public when his daughter persuaded him that the story could bring some financial benefit that would help pay for his grandchildren's education. With the secret finally out, The New York Times said Watergate aficionados would mourn the end to a 30-year cottage industry of Deep Throat speculation. "It's a little like discovering that Superman's secret identity was, well -- Clark Kent," the newspaper said.