Two years of negotiations, furtive planning and a team of editors sworn to silence allowed Vanity Fair to scoop The Washington Post on a story that, by rights, had belonged to the newspaper for 30 years. The celebrity magazine's naming this week of former FBI assistant director Mark Felt as the famed Watergate source, "Deep Throat," was sensational on two levels -- the revelation itself and the fact that the Post, which had a proprietary grasp on Felt's secret for so long, was caught wholly flat-footed. "I had no idea it was coming," admitted Ben Bradlee, the Post's executive editor during the Watergate era and, along with reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, a guardian of Deep Throat's true identity for three decades. The road to Vanity Fair's scoop began in 2003 with an unsolicited call to the monthly's editor Graydon Carter from a San Francisco lawyer, John O'Connor, who said he represented a client who was Deep Throat and who wanted to reveal his identity in the magazine. According to Vanity Fair contributing editor David Friend, the magazine initially passed on the story after O'Connor insisted on payment for Felt and Felt's family. O'Connor then sought to interest a publisher in getting the story out in book form, but failure led him back to Vanity Fair barely a year later. Having checked the story with Felt's family and decided to run it, the magazine went into clandestine mode, assigning 15 editors and staff to the story, all of whom were made to sign confidentiality agreements. In keeping with the "Deep Throat" tradition of subterfuge, the story was codenamed WIG (a corruption of Watergate) and Felt's daughter Joan, a key source, began referring to her father as "Joe Camel." As the publication date neared, the magazine's editors sent the issue to the printers with a dummy coverline "The Door Slams." One particular conundrum facing the magazine was whether or not to contact Woodward or Bernstein and ask them to confirm that Felt was indeed Deep Throat. "If we called Woodward ... he could rush into print his own article about the source's identity," Graydon Carter said, adding that checking the story with Bernstein carried the same risk. "So we didn't call either of them, realising that for 33 years they have consistently refused to divulge their source's name anyway," Carter said. "And we chose, instead, to verify the facts surrounding this amazing tale of intrigue and courage as best we could, using alternative and overlapping sources," he said. The final story carried O'Connor's byline, a fact that led some observers to question whether the lawyer might have violated the attorney-client privilege with the 91-year-old Felt. When the Vanity Fair scoop broke, Woodward and Bernstein's initial reaction was to reiterate what they had said for years: that they would only reveal Deep Throat's identity when the source died. But The Washington Post newsroom was thrown into confusion with the newspaper's executive editor, Leonard Downie, rushing back from a company retreat to handle the situation. "I drove back very fast," Downie said. After discussions with Woodward, Bernstein and Bradlee, Downie said a conclusion was reached that Felt and his family had released them from their promise of confidentiality and that the Post should confirm Felt's disclosure. Downie insisted he was not upset at losing the scoop because Woodward and the newspaper had behaved "honourably" and "didn't want to push Mark Felt into doing something he didn't want to do." Bernstein, meanwhile, said it was strange to have the secret known after such a long time. "It's like having tried to protect something precious for all these years that you carry around, and for the first time it's not there to protect in your pocket anymore. It's a very strange feeling," he said. Bernstein added that he felt "relieved of an obligation."